docs(observability): Add documentation and tests for observability tools (#1437)
googleapis/genai-toolbox: docs/en/resources/tools/cloudmonitoring/cloud-monitoring-query-prometheus.md

---

> title: cloud-monitoring-query-prometheus
> description: Fetches cloudmonitoring data (timeseries metrics) for a project using a given prometheus query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: cloud-monitoring-query-prometheus
type: docs
weight: 1
description: The "cloud-monitoring-query-prometheus" tool fetches time series metrics using a given prometheus query.
```

Author: Made the change

---

The `cloud-monitoring-query-prometheus` tool fetches timeseries metrics data from Google Cloud Monitoring for a project using a given prometheus query.

## About

The `cloud-monitoring-query-prometheus` tool allows you to query all metrics available in Google Cloud Monitoring using the Prometheus Query Language (PromQL).
It's compatible with any of the following sources:

- [cloud-monitoring](../../sources/cloud-monitoring.md)

## Prerequisites

To use this tool, you need to have the following IAM role on your Google Cloud project:

- `roles/monitoring.viewer`

## Arguments

| Name        | Type   | Description                               |
| ----------- | ------ | ----------------------------------------- |
| `projectId` | string | The Google Cloud project ID.              |
| `query`     | string | The Prometheus query to execute.          |

> ## Use Cases

Reviewer: Love this! Thank you!

- **System Health:** Get the overall system health for the database instance (Can use the [prebuilt tools](../../../reference/prebuilt-tools.md)).

## Examples

Here are some examples of how to use the `cloud-monitoring-query-prometheus` tool.

```yaml
tools:
 get_wait_time_metrics:
    kind: cloud-monitoring-query-prometheus
    source: cloud-monitoring-source
    description: |
      This tool fetches system wait time information for AlloyDB cluster, instance. Get the `projectID`, `clusterID` and `instanceID` from the user intent. To use this tool, you must provide the Google Cloud `projectId` and a PromQL `query`.
      Generate `query` using these metric details:
      metric: `alloydb.googleapis.com/instance/postgresql/wait_time`,  monitored_resource: `alloydb.googleapis.com/Instance`. labels: `cluster_id`, `instance_id`, `wait_event_type`, `wait_event_name`.
      Basic time series example promql query: `avg_over_time({"__name__"="alloydb.googleapis.com/instance/postgresql/wait_time","monitored_resource"="alloydb.googleapis.com/Instance","instance_id"="alloydb-instance"}[5m])`

> ```

Reviewer: Please add the Reference Table to the bottom of this page
